README.md, before:

# photodisplay-module
Repository for a mock of the Airbnb photo display component.

## Stack
**Front-End**: React.js<br />
**Server**: Express<br />
**Database**: MySQL<br />
**Image Hosting**: AWS S3<br />

## Instructions for Setting Up Environment
1. Install dependencies with `npm install`
2. Ensure you have nodemon installed globally on your machine. If not, `npm install nodemon --save-dev`.
3. Bundle code with webpack by running `npm run build`
4. Run server with `npm run start`
5. Seed database with fake data by running `npm run seedDB`.

# SDC

### Updated + added CRUD Routes


#### GET
request sent to: ```/photos/get/:listingId```

A route with listingId returns an image taking the shape:
```
{
  id: Number,
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
}
```
Retrieves all the relvant photos for a particular listingId.
Expects status code 200


#### POST
request sent to: ```/photos/post/```
=======
POST request sent to:

A request taking in form data taking the shape:
```
{
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
  listingId: Number,
}
```
Posts a new photo intry to DB.
Expects status code 200


#### DELETE
request sent to: ```/photos/delete/:id```
A request taking in a table entry id of the shape:


```
{
  id : Number,
}
```
Deletes a table entry.
Expects status code 200


#### PUT
request sent to: ```/photos/update_entry/```

A request taking in form data the shame of:
```
{
  id: Number,
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
  listingId: Number,
}
```
Updates the information of a particular table entry located at provided id.

Expects status code 200

## Fake Data Generation

 - ``` WARNING! THE FOLLOWING COMMAND GENERATES ALL 100 MILLION+ RECORDS```
 - ``` THIS COMMAND IS INTENTIONALLY BROKEN BY DEFAULT ```
To re-enable data generation, uncomment noted running script in file ``` data_gen/dataGen.js ```
To re-generate data => from root directory, run command:
```
NOTE: Data generation command is configured to allocate an additional 8GM of RAM
to the generation process. Ensure system has adequate free RAM. Or, execute command with
lower RAM allocation.
```
use: ```node --max-old-space-size=<additional ram> <path to file>```
```
node run big-data-gen
```

## Initialize PostgreSQL bash shell
 - If PostgreSQL was installed using homebrew, server can be started and stopped using brew services. From a terminal, use:
   - ```brew services start postgresql``` to start server
   - ```brew services stop postgresql``` to stop server

 - Once postgreSql server is running, to open PostgreSQL bash shell and immediately connect to a specific database:
   - From terminal, run: ```psql <database_name>```
   - So, to access this repo's database shell, execute, ```psql photo_module```
   - PostgreSQL shell connection to photo_module database will show command line: ```photo_module=#```

### Following commands are executed from psql bash shell.

 - 1: To describe all tables in selected database, use ```\dt```
   - 1.1: Or, describe a specific table ```\dt <table_name>```
 - 2: To connect to another database, use: ```\c <database>```
 - 3: List all databases: ```\l```
 - 4: List all schemas of selected db: ```\dn```

 - 5: To execute a query with feedback use prefix: ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE <query>```
   - 5.1: To select a row for example: ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * from photos WHERE listing_id=4873561;```

## Initialize Cassandra bash shell

 - From Hard Drive directory below user root directory:
   - Will run Cassandra server.

 ```cd usr/local/Cellar/cassandra/3.11.4/bin/```

 - Then, from any terminal bash, run: ```cqlsh --color``` to open the Cassandra bash shell using colored output text.
 - May omit the ```--color``` and just execute ```cqlsh``` as default command.

 - To execute a Cassandra .cql file without starting a shell session use:
```bin/cqlsh --file= <filename>```

 - So, for executing the Cassandra schema file creating the keyspace 'photo_module' and table 'photos_listings', from schema.cql

 - From the terminal, run:
```bin/cqlsh --file= /Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/cassandra/schema.cql```

#### Alternative to start Cassandra Server
  - To start server process from the terminal run: ```brew services start cassandra```
  - To stop server process from the terminal run: ```brew services stop cassandra```
    - Ensure Cassandra isn't running as a background process using Activity Monitor
    - Can also use ```kill -9 <pid_number>``` to force kill Cassandra. Find PID with Activity Monitor, running as 'Java'

## Database Benchmarking

### PostgreSQL

  - When in psql bash shell (for database 'photo_module'), shell command line: ```photo_module=# <shell_command>```
    - To toggle on and off query-time response when executing ```psql``` shell commands, use: ```\timing```.
    - Or, use ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE <psql_shell_command>``` for a more robust query response.

### Table indexing
 - From psql bash shell:
   - To create a B -Tree index on a PostgreSQL table, execute:
   ```CREATE INDEX <column_name> ON <table_name> USING <btree_or_other_index_type> (<column_name>);```
   - However, btree is the default index type. So, command can be shortened to:
   ```CREATE INDEX <column_name> ON <table_name>;```

# Deployment

## Securely Sending Files

To securely send files to a remote server with SSH, from directory where the file to be sent is located:

If I'm trying to send a ```fakeData.csv``` file to my remote server with IP address ```10.10.10.10``` and store that file in a directory on the remote server named ```/data```:

Execute terminal command ```scp fakeData.csv 10.10.10.10:/data```

Also, I can send a ```directory``` in the same fashion using recursive flag ```-r```:
Execute terminal command ```scp -r directory 10.10.10.10:/data```

If authentication key is required by destination server, include a ```-i``` flag immediately after the ```scp``` command:
For example, a .pem key located at ```/User/me/keys/myKey.pem```

Execute: ```scp -i /User/me/keys/myKey.pem fakeData.csv 10.10.10.10:~/data```

## Database

  From Ubuntu shell:
  Install PostgreSQL from source code.

  Open the postgres shell from Ubuntu root directory using ```sudo -u postgres psql```
  Once in postgres shell, command line prompt will show ```postgres=#```

  OR

  Navigate to the postgres directory with ```sudo -i -u postgres```
  Then, enter the postres shell with ```psql```


## Service

  From Ubuntu shell, install dependencies:
  ```sudo apt install nodejs```
  ```sudo apt install npm```

  Using git, clone down service repo,
  ``` git clone https://github/<username>/<repo>.git```

  cd into repo directory and install local dependencies, i.e. ```npm install```

  Run webpack to compile a production bundle.js file ```npm run build-prod```


# Data File Compression / Decompression

## Compression
In order to send large files to EC2, I compressed my ```.csv``` files before ssh delivery to EC2 instance.

To gzip my csv files, save a copy of the original, and output the gzip version into a different directory, renamed with a ```.csv.gz``` extension:

From csv file directory:

In this example, I'm compressing ```fakeDataPhotos1.csv``` and saving the zip copy to directory ```/zip-data``` with a new filename ```fakeDataPhotos3.csv.gz```

Execute:
```gzip -c fakeDataPhotos1.csv >/Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/data_gen/zip-data/fakeDataPhotos1.csv.gz```

Generic command:
```gzip -c file_to_copy_and_compress.csv >/absolute_path_of/copy_directory/new_file_name_of_compressed_copy.csv.gz```


gzip -c fakeDataPhotos4.csv >/Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/data_gen/zip-data/fakeDataPhotos4.csv.gz

## Decompression

To decompress the .gz file use ```gunzip  <filename.gz>```

This will place the decompressed file into the same directory as the location of the .gz file with corrected filename minus the .gz extension.

DOES NOT PRESERVE THE ORIGINAL ```.csv.gz``` FILE. That file is simply decompressed.

Commit message:

Add notes and additional scripts for creating posstgres table without foreign key, then adding it in later + btree index

README.md, after:

# photodisplay-module
Repository for a mock of the Airbnb photo display component.

## Stack
**Front-End**: React.js<br />
**Server**: Express<br />
**Database**: MySQL<br />
**Image Hosting**: AWS S3<br />

## Instructions for Setting Up Environment
1. Install dependencies with `npm install`
2. Ensure you have nodemon installed globally on your machine. If not, `npm install nodemon --save-dev`.
3. Bundle code with webpack by running `npm run build`
4. Run server with `npm run start`
5. Seed database with fake data by running `npm run seedDB`.

# SDC

### Updated + added CRUD Routes


#### GET
request sent to: ```/photos/get/:listingId```

A route with listingId returns an image taking the shape:
```
{
  id: Number,
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
}
```
Retrieves all the relvant photos for a particular listingId.
Expects status code 200


#### POST
request sent to: ```/photos/post/```
=======
POST request sent to:

A request taking in form data taking the shape:
```
{
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
  listingId: Number,
}
```
Posts a new photo intry to DB.
Expects status code 200


#### DELETE
request sent to: ```/photos/delete/:id```
A request taking in a table entry id of the shape:


```
{
  id : Number,
}
```
Deletes a table entry.
Expects status code 200


#### PUT
request sent to: ```/photos/update_entry/```

A request taking in form data the shame of:
```
{
  id: Number,
  photoUrl: String,
  description: String,
  isVerified: Boolean,
  listingId: Number,
}
```
Updates the information of a particular table entry located at provided id.

Expects status code 200

## Fake Data Generation

 - ``` WARNING! THE FOLLOWING COMMAND GENERATES ALL 100 MILLION+ RECORDS```
 - ``` THIS COMMAND IS INTENTIONALLY BROKEN BY DEFAULT ```
To re-enable data generation, uncomment noted running script in file ``` data_gen/dataGen.js ```
To re-generate data => from root directory, run command:
```
NOTE: Data generation command is configured to allocate an additional 8GM of RAM
to the generation process. Ensure system has adequate free RAM. Or, execute command with
lower RAM allocation.
```
use: ```node --max-old-space-size=<additional ram> <path to file>```
```
node run big-data-gen
```

## Initialize PostgreSQL bash shell
 - If PostgreSQL was installed using homebrew, server can be started and stopped using brew services. From a terminal, use:
   - ```brew services start postgresql``` to start server
   - ```brew services stop postgresql``` to stop server

 - Once postgreSql server is running, to open PostgreSQL bash shell and immediately connect to a specific database:
   - From terminal, run: ```psql <database_name>```
   - So, to access this repo's database shell, execute, ```psql photo_module```
   - PostgreSQL shell connection to photo_module database will show command line: ```photo_module=#```

### Following commands are executed from psql bash shell.

 - 1: To describe all tables in selected database, use ```\dt```
   - 1.1: Or, describe a specific table ```\dt <table_name>```
 - 2: To connect to another database, use: ```\c <database>```
 - 3: List all databases: ```\l```
 - 4: List all schemas of selected db: ```\dn```

 - 5: To execute a query with feedback use prefix: ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE <query>```
   - 5.1: To select a row for example: ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * from photos WHERE listing_id=4873561;```

## Initialize Cassandra bash shell

 - From Hard Drive directory below user root directory:
   - Will run Cassandra server.

 ```cd usr/local/Cellar/cassandra/3.11.4/bin/```

 - Then, from any terminal bash, run: ```cqlsh --color``` to open the Cassandra bash shell using colored output text.
 - May omit the ```--color``` and just execute ```cqlsh``` as default command.

 - To execute a Cassandra .cql file without starting a shell session use:
```bin/cqlsh --file= <filename>```

 - So, for executing the Cassandra schema file creating the keyspace 'photo_module' and table 'photos_listings', from schema.cql

 - From the terminal, run:
```bin/cqlsh --file= /Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/cassandra/schema.cql```

#### Alternative to start Cassandra Server
  - To start server process from the terminal run: ```brew services start cassandra```
  - To stop server process from the terminal run: ```brew services stop cassandra```
    - Ensure Cassandra isn't running as a background process using Activity Monitor
    - Can also use ```kill -9 <pid_number>``` to force kill Cassandra. Find PID with Activity Monitor, running as 'Java'

## Database Benchmarking

### PostgreSQL

  - When in psql bash shell (for database 'photo_module'), shell command line: ```photo_module=# <shell_command>```
    - To toggle on and off query-time response when executing ```psql``` shell commands, use: ```\timing```.
    - Or, use ```EXPLAIN ANALYZE <psql_shell_command>``` for a more robust query response.

### Table indexing
 - From psql bash shell:
   - To create a B -Tree index on a PostgreSQL table, execute:
   ```CREATE INDEX <column_name> ON <table_name> USING <btree_or_other_index_type> (<column_name>);```
   - However, btree is the default index type. So, command can be shortened to:
   ```CREATE INDEX <column_name> ON <table_name>;```

### Seeding Consideration
  Extremely large file copy from a .csv file to postres table required considerable processing power. So, it was important to batch out the copy scripts and data files. I decided to create four data files and seed them one at a time. However, this created another issue. The seeding was still taking too much processing power. It became necessary to remove the foreign key constraint from my initial table definition, seed the database, then use an 'ALTER TABLE' statement to add the foreign key constraint after all data had been seeded.

  After adding the foreign key constraint to the photos table, I also added a btree index to the listing_id column of the photos table.
  The commands used are listed below.

  Adding the foreign key constraint:
  ```
  ALTER TABLE photos
    ADD CONSTRAINT fk_photos_listings FOREIGN KEY (listing_id) REFERENCES listings (id);
  ```
  Creating a btree index on the listing_id column of the photos table:
  ```
  CREATE INDEX photos_index ON photos
    USING btree (listing_id);
  ```

# Deployment

## Securely Sending Files

To securely send files to a remote server with SSH, from directory where the file to be sent is located:

If I'm trying to send a ```fakeData.csv``` file to my remote server with IP address ```10.10.10.10``` and store that file in a directory on the remote server named ```/data```:

Execute terminal command ```scp fakeData.csv 10.10.10.10:/data```

Also, I can send a ```directory``` in the same fashion using recursive flag ```-r```:
Execute terminal command ```scp -r directory 10.10.10.10:/data```

If authentication key is required by destination server, include a ```-i``` flag immediately after the ```scp``` command:
For example, a .pem key located at ```/User/me/keys/myKey.pem```

Execute: ```scp -i /User/me/keys/myKey.pem fakeData.csv 10.10.10.10:~/data```

scp -i /User/me/keys/myKey.pem fakeData.csv ubuntu@18.218.63.193:~/postgres

## Database

  From Ubuntu shell:
  Install PostgreSQL from source code.

  Open the postgres shell from Ubuntu root directory using ```sudo -u postgres psql```
  Once in postgres shell, command line prompt will show ```postgres=#```

  OR

  Navigate to the postgres directory with ```sudo -i -u postgres```
  Then, enter the postres shell with ```psql```


## Service

  From Ubuntu shell, install dependencies:
  ```sudo apt install nodejs```
  ```sudo apt install npm```

  Using git, clone down service repo,
  ``` git clone https://github/<username>/<repo>.git```

  cd into repo directory and install local dependencies, i.e. ```npm install```

  Run webpack to compile a production bundle.js file ```npm run build-prod```


# Data File Compression / Decompression

## Compression
In order to send large files to EC2, I compressed my ```.csv``` files before ssh delivery to EC2 instance.

To gzip my csv files, save a copy of the original, and output the gzip version into a different directory, renamed with a ```.csv.gz``` extension:

From csv file directory:

In this example, I'm compressing ```fakeDataPhotos1.csv``` and saving the zip copy to directory ```/zip-data``` with a new filename ```fakeDataPhotos3.csv.gz```

Execute:
```gzip -c fakeDataPhotos1.csv >/Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/data_gen/zip-data/fakeDataPhotos1.csv.gz```

Generic command:
```gzip -c file_to_copy_and_compress.csv >/absolute_path_of/copy_directory/new_file_name_of_compressed_copy.csv.gz```


gzip -c fakeDataPhotos4.csv >/Users/nautilus/hackReactor/hrsf117-sdc/photodisplay-module/data_gen/zip-data/fakeDataPhotos4.csv.gz

## Decompression

To decompress the .gz file use ```gunzip  <filename.gz>```

This will place the decompressed file into the same directory as the location of the .gz file with corrected filename minus the .gz extension.

DOES NOT PRESERVE THE ORIGINAL ```.csv.gz``` FILE. That file is simply decompressed.
